
michael barrow quotes sam page in "The Museletter"
on 13 dec 2023, who said,

  There was a TV commercial some time ago with Alec Baldwin as a substitute school teacher. He asks the class what their teacher was teaching them. The kids say: spelling. He says: “Spelling's not a class. It's a program. Spell-Check.”
   
  Some university professor, challenged about the lack of basic financial literacy of college graduates, said that knowing how to balance a checkbook was as useless and antiquated a skill as knowing how to churn butter. He said if you bank on your smart phone, as everybody does, your phone automatically does that for you.
   
  Were Thomas Watson to post his THINK! signs today, everybody'd say “WHY? I've got an app for that.”
   
  We are infected with a disdain for the very act of thinking. The ability to figure things out is, increasingly, viewed as irrelevant and unnecessary. People are stupid and proud of it.
   
  Sure, we had Cliff Notes when I grew up, and I've yet to read Moby Dick in full. But at least I read the Cliff Notes.
   
  Even picking lottery ticket numbers is too much for people – they let the computer pick random numbers for them. Folks with more money to lose than the average lottery victim buy stock market trading software that flashes green lights to tell them to buy and red lights to tell them to sell.
   
  People couldn't wait for cars that drive themselves.
   
  We are in a mad rush to become a population incapable of thinking or doing for itself. Little birds cozy in the nest, beaks open, waiting for somebody to drop in a worm.
   
  But thinking is all that distinguishes us from those birds. Or pigs. Or, actually, tree stumps.
   
  If we won't think, soon we can't think.
   
  The extreme minority that gets rich and stays rich are still the thinkers, the schemers, the plotters, the information collectors, the creative figure-it-out'ers. The ones who can make a fire with two sticks, and can find the sticks in the woods without a GPS. As there are fewer and fewer such people, more and more money is moving into those fewer and fewer hands.
   
  Turn off the things doing your thinking for you, do money math on a pad, sound out a word and spell it, ponder small and large questions, pull together information, read, watch TV – but ask: how can I use this? Use and strengthen your capacity to think. Or lose it.


i agree with all this but i know i also have to beware of what i think of as "butter churning".

Almost all people used to churn their own butter in their home. While almost everyone knew how to do it, it was a tedious activity. Consequently it was usually assigned to some person at the lowest order of the social hierarchy in a home -- usually a kitchen maid or teenage daughter. Nowadays, almost no one knows how to churn butter. Society progressed, technology progressed. The young woman at the bottom of the social hierarchy in the family home was released of a burdensome activity that reinforced her low social status.

There are people who preserve this knowledge of churning butter, and i have great respect for them, but i am not going to churn my own butter, and i am intentionally not going to expect my daughter to do it for me. (a ridiculously unreasonable expectation given that she is married and has her own household)

and i like Moby Dick in theory, and i think i read it all, but i probably won't again. and people used to complain that people were spending time reading "New World" fiction like Melville when they should be reading Proper English Literature. And there was a time when people thought that reading the works of Austen was wasteful frivolity because people should instead spend their time reading proper works, like Chaucer. And Chaucer was criticized as "vulgar pop literature" compared to the classics in Latin. And in Rome, there was a time when intellectuals thought Latin poetry was inferior to Greek classics.

this is how societies and cultures progress

i agree that personal finances are not butter, and we need to take active roles in managing our finances, but maybe this means reviewing bank statements on a phone app between sessions when we scroll through digg or tik-tok or insta or etsy or ij. Maybe our family relationships are changing as capitalism evolves into a algorithmically managed economy. Maybe that means there will be new winners and losers in an algorithmic economy.

but i hate balancing the checkbook. my wife hates doing it. we both want new ways to manage our finances, because managing wealth too often is -- for us at least -- a distraction from the things that make us happy.

i want to be intentional about progress, but i also don't want to assume the old way of doing things -- which often comes with specific burdens for specific individuals in family or society -- are the best ways of accomplishing these things.

there are underlying dangers, of course, of an algorithmic economic system -- so let's talk about those openly.

we are creating a new class system where there are those who know how to manipulate the algorithms to be the top-wealth owners. there are other people who don't care about being a top wealth owners because scrolling through Etsy makes them happy. What are the barriers that prevent one category of person from becoming another? Are these barriers pre-determined at birth? are they based on gender, race, or physical/mental enablement? And/or are they based on unnecessary cultural and social norms and expectations?

we also have to beware that the new algorithmic economy may be subject to dangerous fragility. any number of societal systems that might collapse could take a world economy with it, and it will be essential that we have individuals capable of doing things like churning butter if we want to have some continuity of society if the lights go out. But we can't expect the same people who manage complex algorithms to be the ones who like to churn butter and then sell their "heritage butter" on etsy. right?

in the danger of an algorithmic economy, though, there are islands of happiness.

i am a techno-hermit. i have copious, conspicuous wealth of spare time to read and think. in that i find that i like understanding algorithms, but i have no aspiration to leverage them as Elon Musk has to become top of the economic hierarchy because i think i am happier than he ever will be, and i pity him for that.

